The Project Gutenberg EBook of The National Geographic Magazine, Vol.
III., PP. 41-52, May 1, 1891, by Adolphus Washington Greely

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The National Geographic Magazine, Vol. III., PP. 41-52, May 1, 1891

Author: Adolphus Washington Greely

Release Date: September 5, 2020 [EBook #63122]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC MAGAZINE, MAY 1, 1891 ***




Produced by Ron Swanson





VOL. III, PP. 41-52, MAY 1, 1891

THE NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC MAGAZINE




GEOGRAPHY OF THE AIR

ANNUAL REPORT BY VICE-PRESIDENT

A. W. GREELY




WASHINGTON

PUBLISHED BY THE NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC SOCIETY

Price 25 Cents.


{41}


VOL. III, PP. 41-52, MAY 1, 1891

THE NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC MAGAZINE




GEOGRAPHY OF THE AIR.

ANNUAL REPORT BY VICE-PRESIDENT

A. W. GREELY.

(_Presented to the Society January 23, 1891._)


In fulfilling the duties growing out of his official position in
connection with this Society, your Vice-President of the Geography of
the Air has been so closely occupied with executive and other official
duties devolving upon him as to preclude his giving that amount of
time and labor to this annual report that the subject merits. Indeed,
no report would be submitted this year had it not seemed better to
insure a continuity of these annual addresses, even if one of them
might not be up to the high standard which should be maintained for
them.

It must have impressed every general reader of scientific journals
that the past year has been marked by the publication of an unusual
number of controversial articles relating entirely or in part to
meteorology. Some of the discussions of this subject appear to be in
the nature of speculation, which, by good authority, is defined to be
"chiefly the work of the imagination, and has little to do with
realities." The status of the meteorological discussion which has been
going on for some time seems to be this: A number of men, applying
themselves to investigation in separate branches or stages of the same
science, are attempting to reconcile their views, which, based as they
are upon entirely different processes of investigation, are not
entirely accordant. Some, at least, of these writers are still
apparently groping in the preliminary, the "natural history" stage of
the {42} science of meteorology, while one alone stands as the
exponent of the "natural philosophy" of meteorology.

To me it seems that it could not have failed to impress any interested
reader who has followed the late publications on the convectional
theory that, in order to clear the ground for definite meteorological
discussion, it is necessary to determine the exact meaning of the
various technical terms employed by the various writers. Whether from
looseness of verbiage originally or from the not infrequent habit of
disputants when worsted to change their ground by claiming to be
misunderstood, we find that some writers are unwilling either to stand
by their first criticisms or to openly abandon them; they prefer to
explain away their defective statements and gradually shift around to
positions almost diametrically opposed to those originally assumed.

The generally accepted theory as to cyclones attributes their
initiatory formation to an unequal distribution of temperature with
resulting mean diminution of pressure, and the movement of the air
from places of high to places of low pressure, the lower air ascending
with a gyratory motion, while air particles moving from opposite
directions form couples which produce rotation. When energetic motions
raise the ascending air to such a height that the temperature, cooled
dynamically in ascending, goes below the dew-point, then the great
store of latent heat thereby set free becomes, it is assumed, the main
source of energy in maintaining the upward convectional movement. The
subsidiary causes are attributed to the diminution of pressure on the
collapse of the vapor, and also to the direct absorption of the sun's
heat at the upper cloud surface.

In anticyclones a slow gyratory descending motion of the air is
assumed. Ferrel considers the cyclone and anticyclone one system, and
believes that air flowing into the cyclone from a "high" at the ground
passes out into the higher atmospheric strata.

Dr. Hann has put forth the hypothesis that the genesis of cyclones and
anticyclones may be sought in the general atmospheric circulation
through a difference of temperature of the air from the equator to the
poles. He speaks of a congestion in the upper or anti-trade winds,
where the air heaps up to a great height, this being the cause of the
anticyclones; and he maintains that the low temperature of the "high"
is due to ground radiation, and that no part of the high pressure is
the result of low temperature.

{43} To this hypothesis of Dr. Hann, ascribing the genesis of storms
to the general circulation of the atmosphere, no application of the
laws of dynamics has yet been made with a view of developing it into
an acceptable "theory." If it should be established it does not follow
that it will in any way affect the truth of the commonly accepted
"convectional system," which, founded as it is on the well-known laws
of thermo-dynamics, is not likely to be successfully assailed. There
may be an improved nomenclature for the laws of statics and dynamics
that will express to the mind more clearly the relation of cause and
effect; but until the advance of scientific research modifies the
present formulation of these laws the convectional theory will be
generally accepted as giving the true interpretation of all the
phenomena to which it could be applied.

Professor Russell, in commenting on this subject, expresses the
opinion that the low temperature is due to the convective interchange
of air at a low temperature in the upper strata with air of a high
temperature in lower strata, such convective interchange tending to
make the whole body of air of a temperature coinciding throughout with
the adiabatic rate of upward diminution, with the consequent result of
rendering the air at the surface of the earth cooler than previously
and the upper air warmer. When the upward diminution of temperature is
less than the adiabatic rate, in the forced circulation of air
crossing a mountain ridge, there occurs the dynamic heating which is
observed in the case of the foehn winds. The low temperature near the
earth he does not believe could ever be entirely produced by nocturnal
radiation from the ground. The high pressure, in his opinion, is
largely the result of greater density due to low temperature, as is
very clearly indicated by the fact that the temperature is almost
inversely proportional to the pressure, and that the places of lower
temperature substantially coincide with the places of greatest
pressure.

In advancing hypotheses and inviting discussion the real object is, or
at least should be, to discover the essential cause or causes which
determine the initial formation and subsequent maintenance and
progress of the cyclone. Some real progress in charting lines of equal
density seems to have been made by M. Nils Ekholm following Professor
Abbe's system of "isostaths," one using the term density, the other
buoyancy. Professor Abbe also introduces the factor of the orographic
gradient, but the {44} latter is simply the measure of a resistance.
The objection to this form of determination is this, that it is a
measure of mass only. The density of two masses of air is determined
to be the same; but as the density may result from two entirely
different causes, their physical relations cannot be fully expressed
in units of gravity. The methods of Professor Abbe and of M. Nils
Ekholm undoubtedly give good results, partly from the coincidence that
humidity usually varies directly as the temperature.

The method proposed by Captain James Allen in 1888, which is briefly
described in appendix 24 to the annual report of the Chief Signal
Officer for 1890, appears to afford the means of more clearly
expressing the relations that exist between the mass of the atmosphere
and the forces available for the generation and movement of storms.
Its tentative application at the Signal Office has anticipated and
explained storm movements not indicated or accounted for by the usual
methods.

As pertinent to this matter, there is instanced a study of the
progress of thunder-storms made by Berg, who observes that the line of
storm front in every case investigated made a decidedly conspicuous
bend into the densest part of the lines representing the absolute
humidity.

       *       *       *       *       *

Scientific conditions have so changed that in these later years it
becomes more and more difficult for investigators to publish any work
which may be characterized as _magnum opus_. Under this head, however,
must be classed Buchan's important memoir on the distribution of
atmospheric pressure, temperature, and wind direction over the whole
world; a large quarto volume, which contains much new material. It has
been incorporated with the results of observations during the
Challenger expedition, in which series this work appears. The isobars
and isotherms for each month in the year for the whole earth are
charted on Mercator's projection, and for the northern hemisphere on a
chart constructed on a polar projection. In connection with an
abstruse subject, to which Buchan has paid so much attention, the
diurnal variation of pressure, he opines from the Challenger
observations that the oscillations are due to the heat taken from the
solar rays directly in passing through the air and instantaneously
communicated through the whole mass from top to bottom by heating and
evaporation of water on innumerable dust particles. The afternoon
minimum, he thinks, is caused by upward currents removing a portion of
the lower air. Marked {45} differences exist between the continental
and insular types, since on islands the morning minimum is unusually
large and the afternoon minimum so small as to disappear, while in
continental types the reverse conditions obtain.

       *       *       *       *       *

Werner Von Siemens, in answering Sprung's criticism on his general air
currents, after repelling certain statements of Sprung, describes his
own theories, which are worthy of restating:

1. All winds are caused by the disturbances of indifferent
equilibrium, and the motion of the air is to restore equilibrium.

2. These disturbances are caused through overheating of the layers of
air near the surface of the earth by insolation, through unsymmetrical
cooling of the higher layers by radiation, and through the heaping up
of air masses caused by obstructions.

3. The disturbances are adjusted by ascending currents, wherein the
particular species of acceleration occurs in which the increase of
velocity is proportioned to the diminution of pressure.

4. The upward currents correspond to equally great descending currents
in which there is a decrease of velocity corresponding to the
acceleration in the upward velocity.

5. If the region of overheating of the air is limited locally, a local
upward current reaching to the highest layers of air arises, and
whirlwinds appear with interior spirally ascending currents and
outside similar spiral descending currents. The result of this is
dispersion of the superfluous heat of the lower air by which the
adiabatic equilibrium is disturbed throughout the whole column of air
taking part in the whirling motion.

6. In case the region of disturbance of the indifferent (or adiabatic)
equilibrium is very extensive, as, for example, the whole of the
tropical zone, the temperature adjustment can no longer be
accomplished by locally ascending whirls, and a whirling current must
then arise involving the whole atmosphere. The same conditions apply
to these as to the local whirls of accelerated upward motion and
retarded descent in such a manner that the velocity at different
altitudes arising from heat converted to work is approximately
proportional to the prevailing pressure at the place.

7. In consequence of the meridional motion produced and maintained by
conversion of heat into work, the whole atmosphere in every latitude
must rotate with approximately the same absolute velocity. Thus the
meridional currents produced by overheating combine with the currents
embracing the whole {46} wind system of the earth, with the result of
disseminating the excess of temperature and humidity of the torrid
zone over the temperate and arctic zones, thereby producing the
prevailing winds.

8. This is accomplished by the production of alternating local
depressions and elevations of barometric pressure by the disturbance
of indifferent equilibrium in the upper layers of the air.

9. "Highs" and "lows" are a consequence of the temperatures and
velocities of the upper currents.

Whence it follows that the most important problem of meteorology is
the investigation of the causes and consequences of the disturbance of
indifferent equilibrium of the atmosphere, and the weightiest problem
in weather prediction is the investigation of the geographical origin
or extraction of air currents pursuing their course above us toward
the pole.

       *       *       *       *       *

In Pomortsew's treatise on synoptic meteorology, published in Russia,
there are full chapters on prediction of weather, whether from
synoptic charts, from observations at a single place, or from
prognostics of great length based on researches on the succession of
warm and cold months. It also contains Pomortsew's investigations on
the types of pressure distribution in eastern Europe, as well as the
average path of cyclones.

       *       *       *       *       *

The favorable opportunities afforded by the Eiffel tower have been
utilized by French meteorologists. M. Angot states that during the
anti-cyclone of November, 1889, the temperature on the tower was
several degrees higher than below. The change of weather set in
earlier, with a strong and warm wind, on the tower, while the air at
the ground was cold and calm. Wind observations on the tower show a
ratio of 3.1 at that height (303 meters) to the velocity at a height
of 21 meters, as determined from 101 days' observations, which,
remarkable at such a small height, discloses the peculiarity of high
mountain stations.

       *       *       *       *       *

Partsch, writing on evidence of climatic changes within historical
times in the Mediterranean region, remarks that too much attention has
been given to changes in crops, the introduction of plants, and the
limits of domestic animals. He states that existing information as to
the harvest time of ancient days indicates an unchanged climate, while
the land-locked lakes in Tunis, which afford the best evidence on
rainfall variation, show absolutely no climatic change.

       *       *       *       *       *

{47} Van Bebber, in writing on weather types, claims that a line drawn
from the center of a cyclone perpendicularly in the direction of the
heaviest gradients will in general be perpendicular to the subsequent
path of the "low," and that these lows leave high temperature on the
right hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hill, in describing hail-stones and tornadoes in India, explains them
on the principle of the great diminution of temperature upwards in the
air, but a critic, in combating this theory, objects to the high and
low stations selected to show temperatures.

       *       *       *       *       *

The so-called "weather plant" of the tropics has passed through the
process of investigation with the usual result. It appears surprising
that in these days it should be believed that any plant or animal can
foretell weather 48 hours in advance, particularly after considering
the vast amount of proof as to the enormous rapidity with which
weather-changes progress from day to day.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hugo Meyer, in treating the precipitation of central Germany for the
ten years ending in 1885, pertinently remarks that the same
significance does not attach to the same rainfall for all places and
different times of the year, for this average value is not the amount
most likely to fall in any particular interval of time, since there is
a limit to the extent of the negative deviations on one side--that is,
0 or no rainfall, while on the positive side there is no limit. The
most probable depth of rainfall, therefore, is less than the mean
value, the preponderance of negative over positive deviations being
about 10 per cent. and sometimes as great as 20 per cent.

       *       *       *       *       *

Professor W. M. Davis wrote an interesting review of Professor
Ferrel's popular treatise on the winds, published a year ago.
Commenting on the review, the editor of _Meteorologische Zeltschrift_,
Vienna, remarks on a very important omission in the treatise, namely,
the absence of all reference to the diurnal variation of the wind and
the many interesting relations it bears to other phenomena, a notable
omission in a treatise specially devoted to winds. The treatment of
the monsoon wind and its relation to the general circulation is highly
commended by the editor, and indicated as being all new.

       *       *       *       *       *

Your Vice-President has elsewhere expressed his opinion that monsoon
winds, applying the term by liberal construction to signify winds
which recur with returning seasons, cannot with {48} any degree of
correctness be asserted to prevail in the United States. It is true
that the prevailing surface winds of the greater part of the United
States come from the western quadrants--that is, between southwest and
northwest--and so are in substantial harmony with the general
atmospheric circulation as shown by the upper-wind currents of Mount
Washington (from the northwest) and Pike's peak (from the southwest).
But, apart from the easterly and northeasterly trades on the Florida
coast, it appears from the records that in no case for any
considerable section of the country do 50 per cent. of the winds blow,
for any consecutive number of months, either from any single point or
from two neighboring points of the compass. Occasionally, however, the
local configuration of the country is such that winds are drawn up or
down valleys, and, being diverted from their free and proper
direction, the wind in such cases follows the trend of the valley or
depression.

       *       *       *       *       *

In general your Vice-President would feel inclined to refer only
casually to the work proceeding from the Bureau over which he has the
honor to preside, but this year has been marked by special researches
and investigations of general interest. As the work of investigation
has been entrusted to the professors of the Signal Service, due credit
should not be refused them from their own official chief.

Special reference should be made to the work of Professor Charles F.
Marvin, whose successful experiments on wind pressures and velocities
have attracted the attention of experts both in Europe and in this
country. Unfortunately there was available only a small sum (about one
hundred dollars) for the expense of experiments, but with this petty
sum, supplemented by his ingenuity, Professor Marvin has very
satisfactorily determined the coëfficients of the various forms of the
Robinson anemometer, with which instrument the velocity of the wind is
very generally determined. Following these investigations, the Royal
Meteorological Society of England reopened the question, which, after
a costly set of experiments with results widely differing from those
of Professor Marvin, had been considered closed.

The general results of these researches, which are believed to be
sufficiently definite for general questions, are not only prized by
the scientist, but they are of value to the engineer and the builder.
Indeed, to all interested in costly structures or extended works
liable to harm from wind pressures, the factor of safety is {49} a
matter of no small pecuniary importance. These experiments show that,
as was formerly believed to be the case, the wind pressure varies as
the square of the velocity of the wind, expressed in miles per hour;
but a most important fact has developed, namely, that the pressure in
pounds per square foot is equal to the miles of hourly velocity
multiplied by 0.004 instead of 0.005, as was formerly assumed.

Professor Marvin was not content with one system of experiments, but
he further attacked the problem in a direct manner by a method which
checked and verified his experiments with the whirling machine. On the
summit of Mount Washington, at an elevation of 6,300 feet, he obtained
simultaneously and under the same conditions, by automatic and
electrical apparatus, continuous registration of the pressure of the
wind in pounds per square foot and of the velocity in miles per hour.

The results thus verified can be considered as conclusive from a
general standpoint. The corrections for the Robinson anemometer thus
determined from these experiments are comparatively unimportant at low
velocities, say from 10 to 15 miles per hour, being only a fraction of
a mile per hour. The uncorrected velocities, however, are in all cases
too large, and by greater and greater amounts the higher the velocity.
At 60 miles per hour the observed velocities are about 12 miles per
hour too high, and for an indicated velocity of 90 miles the
experiments show that the actual velocity is but a fraction over 69
miles per hour.

The anemometer formula found to satisfy most closely the entire range
of experiments has the following form for velocities in miles per
hour:

  Log. _V_ = 0.509 + 0.9012 log. _v_.

This difference indicated by the formula may seem small and
insignificant, as it is in the case of light winds, but at very high
velocities the differences are very great. For instance, an actual
velocity of 60 miles per hour may occur at some time in almost any
locality of the United States for a few minutes, and even greater
velocities are occasionally reported, apart from severe tornadoes.
Under the old coëfficients for the Robinson anemometer an actual
velocity of 60 miles per hour would have been reported as 77 miles per
hour, which under the old factor of 0.005 would mean a pressure of
29.6 pounds per square foot; but when considered with reference to the
true velocity of 60 miles, under {50} the new factor of 0.004, the
pressure would only be 14.4 pounds per square foot--a reduction of
over 50 per cent. from the pressure-values formerly accepted.

Professor Marvin has undertaken to verify, and also to extend to even
lower temperatures, the observations of Regnault as to the pressure of
aqueous vapor at low temperatures, especial attention being given to
temperature conditions from 0° centigrade to -50° centigrade. These
observations disclose, below 0° centigrade, small but constant
differences from the values assigned by Regnault.

In all this work Professor Marvin has shown such ingenuity of
resource, such skill in adapting means to the end, and such deftness
in improvising and manufacturing the requisite instruments as have
elicited commendation from all who have seen his work and followed his
methods. Your Vice-President alludes to this not only to give that
credit rightfully due to Professor Marvin, but to illustrate this as a
type of the highly important work which is being done in all branches
of science here in Washington by young men sometimes illy equipped as
to means, and still more illy paid. Men engaged in work of original
investigation should receive higher pay than clerks in charge of
routine duties; but unfortunately the majority of them do not.

       *       *       *       *       *

The work of Professor Hazen in charting tornadoes and in determining
their relative frequency and severity is directly in the line of the
Geography of the Air.

Great attention had previously been given to this subject by
Lieutenant John P. Finley, who, with indefatigable industry, had
accumulated an enormous mass of data relative to these violent
outbursts of nature's forces. The figures and deductions previously
put forth under the authority of the Signal Service having been
questioned, the Chief Signal Officer felt obliged, in view of the
growing practical importance of the question, as indicated by the
great sums annually paid out in the Ohio valley and in the
trans-Mississippi region for protection against tornadoes, to reöpen
the subject. Instructions of the most conservative character were
given to Professor Hazen to determine carefully the prevalence and
number of tornadoes in the United States, the areas devastated by
them, and the number of lives lost annually. This work was carefully
scrutinized during its progress to see that it should be devoid of
theory and rest on the solid basis of fact. The results are most
assuring to every {51} one, and must serve to allay the unreasonable
fears of the inhabitants of the so-called "tornado districts." It
appears that there is no part of the United States in which annually
more than one square mile of devastation or severe destruction can be
expected for each 185,000 square miles, although cases of _limited
destruction_ may occur annually for about every 5,000 square miles of
area. In no state may destructive tornadoes be expected, on an
average, more than once in two years; and the area over which total
destruction can be expected is, as shown by the foregoing figures,
exceedingly small, even in localities most liable to these violent
storms. The annual death casualties from tornadoes have averaged, in
the last 18 years, 102 annually; but it is believed that the death
rate from lightning is greater than that from tornadoes, since during
March to August, 1890, the names of 110 are on record who have lost
their lives by lightning, although the data are incomplete, especially
as regards the southern states. These statistics cannot be passed by
lightly, however, and it is doubtful if in the main they are much in
error. By them it appears from five years' record that the average
annual death rate by lightning in the United States is 3.8 per million
of inhabitants, or 0.2 above the average. In Sweden, for sixty years,
the average has been 3.0; in France, for forty-nine years, 3.1; in
Baden, for seventeen years, 3.8; and in Prussia, for fifteen years,
4.4 per million.

Other figures, given by a life-insurance agent in St. Louis, which the
author claims to have compiled with great care, place the average
annual rate of death from lightning in the United States at 206, being
more than double the deaths from tornadoes. It must be understood that
these figures are not vouched for, and must be very cautiously
received, as originating with companies interested pecuniarily in the
statistics.

On the whole, therefore, it may be safely assumed that tornadoes are
not so destructive to life as thunder-storms.

       *       *       *       *       *

Professor Thomas Russell has formulated a method for prediction of
cold waves. They always occur after "lows" and before "highs," and
different cold waves vary in extent from three "units" to sixty. A
"unit" of temperature-fall is taken as a fall of twenty degrees over
an area of 50,000 square miles.

The temperature-fall curves in the United States are approximately
elliptical in shape. Perfect ellipses represent actual temperature
falls with an error not exceeding six degrees in {52} most cases.
These fall lines are intersections of planes with a cone which
graphically represents the totality of temperature-fall, the contents
of the cone being equal to the area of its base multiplied by its
altitude, which is the greatest fall in temperature at the center of
the cold wave.

A formula has been devised, based on 127 special cases, representing
the amount of fall in terms of the amount of barometric depression in
a "low," and the amount of excess if a "high," and the density of the
isothermal lines in the region.

From proper consideration of the type of low area, shape of isobars,
and position of the long axis, definite conclusions can be drawn as to
the subsequent shape of the elliptical twenty-degree temperature-fall
area and its position.

A method has been devised, also by Professor Russell, for determining
the maximum fall of temperature at the center of the cold wave. The
maximum fall and extent of fall being known, from suitably prepared
tables, the area of twenty-degree fall can be derived. Previously
prepared pieces of card-board are laid in the proper position on a map
of suitable scale, and lines drawn around them. Between the line
representing the twenty-degree fall and the center, the other falls of
thirty degrees, forty degrees, etc., are sketched in.

       *       *       *       *       *

The foregoing sketch of the geography of the air may appear too
superficial and limited for the purposes of this Society, but its
further elaboration was impracticable. Indeed, the subject of
meteorology could hardly have been touched upon this year had it not
been for the courtesy of Professor Russell in placing at my disposal
notes upon translations from foreign publications, especially from the
German; which publications I have been unable to examine save in a
casual way.

The address, as it is, is submitted only in the hope that it may
serve, if no other purpose, at least to indicate the great interest
which now obtains in the geography of the air, and which manifests
itself in the production of meteorological pamphlets and publications
too numerous to permit any one charged with important executive duties
to examine them all, even in a non-critical way.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The National Geographic Magazine, Vol.
III., PP. 41-52, May 1, 1891, by Adolphus Washington Greely

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC MAGAZINE, MAY 1, 1891 ***

***** This file should be named 63122-8.txt or 63122-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/1/2/63122/

Produced by Ron Swanson
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

